ChemChina's Purchase of Syngenta Won't Be the Last in the Chemical Sector
By Tony Dreibus | Contributor

Feb. 9, 2016, at 11:15 a.m.

China National Chemical Corp.'s proposed $43 billion purchase of Syngenta (ticker: SYT) should vault the Chinese giant to the top of the agricultural chemicals sector, while giving the Swiss company a much-needed infusion of cash to complete some of its own goals.

The acquisition, along with an announcement that Dow Chemical Co. (DOW) and DuPont (DD) will merge, is likely just the beginning of consolidation in the chemicals industry, analysts say.

A slowing global economy and reduced spending on research and development is leading companies to seek growth opportunities outside of normal channels, says Duane Dickson, the U.S. chemicals and materials sector lead at New York-based Deloitte. Companies have been looking at available takeover targets and are finally starting to make moves.

"It's not like any chemical company can say, 'I can get organic growth [through] research and development,'" Dickson says. "When global growth starts to slow down, you get growth inorganically because it's hard to get growth organically. That's one of the big drivers. We're really seeing the culmination of companies reviewing what's out there, and we're finally getting to a point where they know the business well enough to make decisions."

ChemChina's acquisition of Syngenta will be beneficial for both companies as it will help improve food security in China while giving the Swiss company the money it needs to meet its own growth targets, says Jeremy Redenius, a London-based senior research analyst who covers the European chemicals industry for research and trading firm Bernstein.

Syngenta revenue in 2015 fell 11 percent from the prior year. Operating income dropped 13 percent, and net income tumbled 17 percent last year.


"Syngenta is under a lot of capital pressure lately because it has struggled financially the last few years," Redenius says. "For them to focus on acquiring to improve their business, they're not going to get that ability from an investor base. But with ChemChina, they're in a much better position to invest."

ChemChina will pay 470 Swiss francs ($460) per share and a special dividend of 5 Swiss francs to shareholders once the transaction is completed, which is expected to be by the end of this year.

The Swiss company has been a lightning rod for merger and acquisition activity in the past year. Monsanto Co. (MON) attempted to purchase Syngenta last year for $46 billion, but was rebuffed due to what Syngenta thought was too low of a valuation. Monsanto then withdrew its bid.

Under the deal with ChemChina, Syngenta would remain headquartered in Switzerland, and the takeover is backed by the company's board.

